docs: add mentoring new maintainers document (#1863)
asyncapi/community: docs/onboarding-guide/mentoring-maintainers.md

5. **Maintaining and improving documentation**  
   _Example: Update the README when project setup changes, or add diagrams and examples to explain new features in the docs._

6. **Identifying and mentoring future maintainers**  
   _Example: Invite an active contributor to shadow PR reviews or gradually assign them bigger responsibilities like triaging issues._

7. **Supporting contributors and nurturing participation**  
   _Example: Answer a contributor’s question in Slack, help them understand project conventions, or guide them through their first issue._

8. **Recognizing and celebrating contributions**  
   _Example: Publicly thank contributors in Slack or GitHub, highlight notable contributions in community meetings, or nominate someone for GitHub Stars._

But being a maintainer is more than just fulfilling tasks; it's about **ownership and leadership**.

You're not just reviewing PRs; you're shaping the future of the project. Whether it's unblocking a stuck contributor, advocating for improvements in the roadmap, or leading releases, maintainers play a crucial role in keeping the project active and healthy.

> Maintainers also lead by example by not only solving issues, but also explaining why decisions are made, and guiding others to think critically and collaboratively. It’s about striking a balance between technical excellence and community empathy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintainers also lead by example not only by solving issues, but also explaining why decisions are made, and guiding others to think critically and collaboratively. It's about striking a balance between technical excellence and community empathy.
```

> Ultimately, maintainers are the glue that holds everything together, ensuring smooth operations, maintaining community trust, and advancing AsyncAPI’s vision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultimately, maintainers are the glue that holds everything together, ensuring smooth operations, maintaining community trust, and advancing AsyncAPI's vision.
```

## Best Practices for Maintainers

Keep these best practices in mind as you mentor and lead:

- 💬 **Communicate clearly and publicly**. Use public channels so others can learn and contribute.

- ⚙️ **Automate what you can**. Use bots and CI to handle routine tasks and reduce manual overhead.

- 📝 **Write things down**. Document decisions, workflows, and open questions.

- 🧑‍🏫 **Be an active mentor**. Provide feedback, do code walkthroughs, and encourage learning moments.

- 🙌 **Inspire contribution**. Invite others to take ownership of issues or features.

- ✅ **Set a high bar for quality**. Encourage contributors to write clean, tested, and thoughtful code.

- 📅 **Show up consistently**. Attend meetings or community check-ins to stay aligned.

- 💚 **Avoid burnout**. Ask for help when needed and model healthy work boundaries.

> > “You are not just reviewing PRs—you are building people.”  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "You are not just reviewing PRs, you are building people." 
```

---

> title: Strategies for mentoring new maintainers

Author: Other files in the onboarding folder does not have a description, that's why I did not add it or will this be an exception?

> title: Strategies for mentoring new maintainers

Reviewer 2: I must have missed this, but it's best practices to have a title, description, and weight

weight: 150
---

# Introduction
This guide outlines strategies for mentoring and supporting new maintainers within the AsyncAPI project. By documenting and adopting these strategies, we aim to promote long-term sustainability, reduce the burden on existing maintainers, and ensure new maintainers thrive in their roles.

> As we continue emphasizing the importance of onboarding new maintainers, it's crucial to also provide them with the tools, guidance, and support they need to succeed. While this document is primarily intended for new maintainers, it also serves as a resource for existing maintainers, contributors, and the wider AsyncAPI community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we continue to emphasize the importance of onboarding new maintainers, we must also provide them with the necessary tools, guidance, and support to ensure their success. While this document is primarily intended for new maintainers, it also serves as a valuable resource for existing maintainers, contributors, and the broader AsyncAPI community.
```

## Mentorship Program Structure
These are some strategies to guide maintainers as they begin their journey.
- **One-on-One Mentorship:** New maintainers are paired with experienced ones for personalized guidance. This allows for direct support, fosters trust, and creates a space for open questions and learning.

> - **Shadowing:** Before fully stepping into the role, new maintainers can observe experienced maintainers—reviewing code, watching decision-making processes, and attending community meetings. This hands-on exposure helps them build confidence and context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Shadowing:** Before fully stepping into the role, new maintainers can observe experienced maintainers reviewing code, observing decision-making processes, and attending community meetings. This hands-on exposure helps them build confidence and context.
```

- **Recorded Breakthroughs:** Experienced maintainers can record video walkthroughs of the project architecture, common workflows, and publishing releases. These videos can serve as a guide for new maintainers and contributors in general.

> - **Regular Sync-ups:** Bi-weekly meetings offer an open forum for discussion, updates, and mentorship. New maintainers are encouraged to attend, ask questions, share challenges, and contribute ideas.

Reviewer 2: This might be tricky, not all mentors might be up for it

> - **Regular Sync-ups:** Bi-weekly meetings offer an open forum for discussion, updates, and mentorship. New maintainers are encouraged to attend, ask questions, share challenges, and contribute ideas.

Reviewer 3: even weekly, I do it weekly

just make a list of how to do mentoring to get best results

and also make a note, that side effect of having regular sync, is that mentee then push changes, or asks questions only right before meeting. I've need it many times. It is something with our human brains that we treat meetins as the time to execute - like we forget async communication is possible, and then instead of asking whenever we need help, we ask only during the meeting

## Roles and responsibilities of a maintainer
As an AsyncAPI maintainer, your responsibilities include:

1. Guiding the technical direction of the project

2. Reviewing and resolving issues and pull requests

3. Managing CI/CD workflows and GitHub automation

4. Enforcing coding standards and architectural consistency

5. Maintaining and improving documentation

6. Identifying and mentoring new maintainers

7. Supporting contributors and nurturing community involvement

8. Recognizing and celebrating contributions

> But being a maintainer is more than just fulfilling tasks—it's about **ownership and leadership**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But being a maintainer is more than just fulfilling tasks; it's about **ownership and leadership**.
```

You're not just reviewing PRs; you're shaping the future of the project. Whether it's unblocking a stuck contributor, advocating for improvements in the roadmap, or leading releases, maintainers play a crucial role in keeping the project active and healthy.

> Maintainers also lead by example—by not just solving issues, but explaining why decisions are made, and guiding others to think critically and collaboratively. It’s about striking a balance between technical excellence and community empathy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maintainers also lead by example by not only solving issues but also explaining why decisions are made and guiding others to think critically and collaboratively. It’s about striking a balance between technical excellence and community empathy.
```

> Ultimately, maintainers serve as the glue that holds everything together—ensuring smooth operations, maintaining community trust, and advancing AsyncAPI’s vision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ultimately, maintainers are the glue that holds everything together, ensuring smooth operations, maintaining community trust, and advancing AsyncAPI’s vision.
```

## Best Practices for Maintainers
Here are a few principles to guide maintainers in their day-to-day:

- 💬 Communicate openly and clearly. Prefer public discussions to private ones so others can learn too.

- ⚙️ Automate repetitive tasks. Use bots and CI tools to handle routine checks.

> - 📝 Document everything. From decisions to ideas—write things down for others to follow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 📝 Document everything. From decisions to ideas, write things down for others to follow.
```
